Read the ./overview.txxt and powerups-list.txxt and ./execution.txxt for reference.




I'm looking for feedback on how far to push the "no-state" design principle.

First, my rationale: dotfiles managers fall largely into two camps: the complete
unified packages and the YOLO shell scripts.

the former provide this really integrated experience, but invariably they
overlap with source control and package managers. that is they embrace the
handling / listing of changes and they have various facilities for installing /
updating / partial executions of config packages.

the latter are some degrees of shell scripts that copy , link and run files
with little structure, control, safety or consistency.

dodot aims for a sweet spot that : 
- let's git handle the source control 
- forgo the packager manager aspect entirely by  a simple and safe model.
- allow users to configure and organize their dotfiles with great freedom


Regarding state and package management, this is a slippery slope that I know
too well, and it's something I don't want for dodot not for users. Take the
simplest thing possible: keeping track of what packs are installed or not.

Sure, it's easy enough to keep a file that has the packs we have installed. But
that , it turns out, is not enough. Did the installed version change? What
changed?  Now you  have versioning. Sure, you can have simpler things like an
md5 of the entire pack, but that gets tricky. if the user has just changed a
line in his .vimrc file, which is part of the vim pack, that would trigger a
difference, when in truth the same thing was installed, it's just that the
config file changed.

This is a simple example, but once you start, you end up with formal versions
and dependencies and safe forward and backward compatibility, and the works.
Then you have partial installs, updates, rollbacks. That's what package
managers do and it's VERY HARD to get right.

Users , understandably, once presented with installing things will assume this
rich functionality is there. what do you mean the installed failed half way?
what now? 

the design we've opted has a no state approach. it's a good trade off, which
incurs in: 

1. install.sh and Brewfile must be idempotent, i.e. running them multiple
  times should not change the system, only the first time it runs.
  For Brewfile this is a non issue, as homebrew works like this.
  but the user generated install.sh does require users to handle this.
  in practice, I don't think this is a big deal. I've never written such a
  script in a way that I had certainty whether it had ran or not and which
  version. all the installs scripts I  see are safe to run multiple times, but
  of course, this is not a guarantee and it does require user discipline.

2. install and brew performance
  All other powerups are very fast to run. they concat part os files, create
  some links. it's fast. Even large dotfiles repos, it's almost instantaneous.
  If we run install.sh and Brewfile every time, it will take a while.


So these two points are negatives on the current design. I'm inclined to be ok
with the first issue, but issue 2 is very real. Deploy all goes from taking
sub seconds to 30s or a minute, it does change the user experience. 

Another point is that this doesn't give users any  visibility on the system
status. This is actually ironic. You see, all other will either will
either: 
- create symlinks in some <STATE>/<power-up>/<pack>.sh like
  ~/.config/state/dodot/aliases/neovim.sh
- create a symlink to predictable locations

That is, all powerups, aside from  install.sh can easily be inspected and we
can provide users with a detailed view of what is deployed and what not.
To be clear, we can give users this without state, as long as we don't include
the install state.


Putting this all together, while I much like the radical no state approach, I
do see that performance overhead of install.sh and Brewfile on updates + lack
    of visibility  on stall whereas all others work does make me wonder if we
    should change this.

The simplest way I can think about changing this is: 

a. Split $ dodot install and dodot deploy  / update
The gist is that install would only  run the install.sh and Brewfile, which
would make the idem potency issue safer (but still a thing) but would definitely fix the performance issue.
b. we could keep a simple state file that would list something like: 

packs:
    - neovim
        - install:sh: 3432a
        - Brewfile: 3432b

that is, the md5 of each of the install files. This would allow us to easily
tell if a pack was installed and whether the installed version changed (we
definitely don't want to track changes and what not)

c. make dodot install only run if not installed (giving a --force options to
run again), making very safe at the cost of user complexity

d. a $dodot uninstall command. 
Now, this again has to be a simpler view. For the install.sh, the reasonable
expectation is that if a uninstall.sh exists, that gets run, and it's up to the
user to guarantee symmetric installs and uninstalls. Undoing arbitrary shell
scrips is just not possible.
For homebrew, it should be simpler, as you  could just uninstall. But in
practice that is not the right thing to do, as various packs or the user's base
system might have already installed things that we would remove. It's still
fixable as we can ask user confirmation of which formulae to remove


Closing thoughts: 
- the current design shines in simplicity from the codebase and the user
  experience, with the caveat of performance on updates and install visibility.

- there is a reasonable change that : 
    - can be said to match users expectations of functionality (it can tell if
      installed and changed, supports uninstall etc)
    - has a manageable complexity cost ( a simple file, simple semantics and
      some more commands and docs)
- the question is whether this is worth it. I think it is, but I would like to


In short, the current system surely falls a bit short on user expectation but
with a great upside on simplicity. I can see a middle ground, another space
where we can deliver (mostly) to expectations while keeping complexity
manegeable, but I am not sure if it's worth it.

Task: 
Help me go over the trade-offs, explore the solutions (feel free to suggest
other ones)


Based on my reading of the design documents and your thoughtful analysis, I see the core
  tension clearly. Let me explore the trade-offs and potential solutions:

  The Core Trade-offs

  Current No-State Design

  Pros:
  - Radical simplicity in codebase
  - No synchronization issues between state and reality
  - No version conflicts or dependency hell
  - Files under source control ARE the deployed files
  - Aligns perfectly with Unix philosophy

  Cons:
  - Performance hit on every deployment (30s-1min for brew/install)
  - No visibility into what's installed
  - Users must write idempotent install.sh scripts
  - Can't tell if something needs updating without running it

  Your Proposed Middle Ground

  Your suggestion to split dodot install and dodot deploy with minimal MD5 tracking is
  clever. Let me analyze it:

  Benefits:
  - Solves the performance issue elegantly
  - Provides basic visibility (installed/changed)
  - Maintains conceptual simplicity
  - Avoids version management complexity

  Risks:
  - Still requires idempotent scripts
  - MD5 approach has edge cases (as you noted with .vimrc edits)
  - Introduces first bit of state management (slippery slope?)

  Alternative Approaches to Consider

  1. Lazy State Detection (No stored state)

  Instead of storing state, detect it at runtime:
  - For Brewfile: Query brew list to see what's already installed
  - For install.sh: Let scripts self-report their state (standardized marker files)
  - Performance: Cache detection results for the session only

  This keeps dodot stateless while being smarter about what needs running.

  2. Explicit Opt-in State

  Make state management an optional power-up:
  [powerups.brew]
  track_state = true  # User explicitly opts in
  state_method = "md5"  # or "timestamp" or "marker_file"

  This way, users who want simplicity get it, while others can opt into state tracking.

  3. Hybrid Approach: State as Cache

  Treat state not as truth but as performance optimization:
  - Store MD5s but always allow --force to ignore
  - State file is deletable without breaking anything
  - State mismatch triggers prompt: "Brewfile changed. Run? [Y/n]"

  This frames state as a convenience, not a requirement.

  4. The "Install Manifest" Pattern

  Instead of tracking state, have powerups generate manifests:
  - install.sh writes what it did to install.manifest
  - Brewfile processing writes brew.manifest
  - dodot status reads these manifests (if they exist)

  This provides visibility without dodot managing state.

  My Recommendation

  I think your instinct about the middle ground is correct. The performance issue is real and
   will frustrate users. Here's what I'd suggest:

  1. Implement the split commands (install vs deploy)
    - This alone solves 80% of the problem
    - Clear mental model: install = heavy operations, deploy = lightweight
  2. Use content hashing, but smartly
    - Hash only the install.sh and Brewfile themselves
    - Store as ~/.local/state/dodot/install-state.json (follows XDG)
    - Make it append-only and human-readable
  3. Keep it simple and transparent
  {
    "neovim": {
      "install.sh": "3432a",
      "last_run": "2024-01-15T10:00:00Z"
    }
  }
  4. Make state optional and recoverable
    - --force always ignores state
    - Deleting state file is always safe
    - dodot install --check shows what would run without running it
  5. For uninstall, keep it explicit and simple**
    - If uninstall.sh exists, run it
    - For Brewfile, show what would be removed and confirm
    - Don't try to be too clever

  The Philosophical Question

  You asked whether it's worth it. I think yes, because:

  1. The performance issue is a deal-breaker - Users will create workarounds anyway
  2. Your proposed solution maintains conceptual integrity - It's still fundamentally
  stateless, just with a performance cache
  3. It matches user expectations without becoming a package manager

  The key is to frame this not as "state management" but as "performance optimization" and
  "execution tracking". The system remains stateless in that deleting all state files doesn't
   break anything - it just makes things slower.

  What do you think? Does this analysis help clarify the path forward?
